After Akbar had conquered Northern India he was looking to expand his kingdom to central and western India
with the seaport Gujarat being of special interest as it was the gateway to trades and contact with the rest of the world.
But the Ranthambore and surrounding areas ruled by the Rajput cast were in the way.
The elevation of the Ranthambore fortress was an impressive challenge, and considered impenetrable
as it was intentionally perched above and away from all threats.
In the upper left corner of the image, the Ran mountain’s cliff form into a multitude of mighty hands cradling and lifting the fortress upwards
This lofty height of the Ranthambore fortress was not the only challenge facing Akbar.
He was employing a new method in military manoeuvres by mobilizing and including heavy artillery in his campaign,
to conquer more territories, which made this siege ever more remarkable.
The cannons opposite the fortress in the upper right corner are examples of this new military strategy,
until this point in history, cannons were stationary defence weapons to protect fortresses.
They were not considered as a weapon to use in the field, so carting them to another kingdom’s fortress to do battle was not consideration possible or plausible.
But Akbar, knew that in order to succeed in this take over, he had to be able to fight on the same level and have the same artillery power as the fortresses had.
Although these cannons were for mobility, they required several hundred oxen and elephants to move them along a steep incline to the level of the fortress.
Akbar set up camp by erecting tents that surrounded the fortress.
In the lower left corner, these decorative, colourful tents In the lower left corner were most likely housing Akbar and the higher-ranking individuals.
In the lower central area and towards the lower right corner of the image we see,
supervisors instructing men to raise a sabot to protect the army in battle.
Strong stonecutters as well as smiths and carpenters addressed themselves to the duty.
The man in the right lower corner with an animal skin poach is spraying water into a container of cement.
Another worker mixes the mortar, and the man directly above him carries the cement to the men forming the buttresses, whom are positioned to his left.
The dress within this military hierarchy.
Distinctively separates the level of command with Akbar pictured in the upper right corner,
fully clothed in white robes, possibly signifying purity, along with leggings and shoes.
The man to Akbar’s right must be of high rank as he is in a green patterned textile which appears to correlate with his rank of importance,
as with others such as the man in the red patterned robes in the lower center, he seems to be directing the men to his left with a prod.
These men must be in a lower rank as they are in plain cloths.
The lowest ranking men such as the boulder carrier in the center of the image and the mortar carrier in the lower right corner are wearing very little clothing and are barefoot.
Which brings the awareness that men at the top of the hierarchy wear shoes, while all the lower ranking individuals are barefoot.
We conclude by turning our attention back to Akbar’s siege on Ranthambore.
This new concept of matching the military arsenal with that of the fortress proved to be a surprising success and Akbar conquered Ranthambore within two months.
This siege was just a part of an overall campaign to secure not only as much of India as possible
but to gain access to the West coastal trading routes in Gujarat in order to gaining access to the rest of the world, such as with the Ottoman and Safavids
Produced Directed and Created by Ruth Nygard